+++
title = "When I update version numbers"
author = ["Pieter Swinkels"]
date = 2022-12-28
slug = "when-i-update-version-numbers"
draft = false
+++

When a colleague asked me when to update the version number of a software
package, and how, this is what I answered.

First of all, I strive to follow [semver](https://semver.org/), even though there are scenario's where
semver is less applicable. First a recap about semver, for a version x.y.z you

-   increase z if there is a bug fix that leaves the new version backward-compatible;
-   increase y if there is new functionality that leaves the new version backward-compatible;
-   increase x if the new version is not backward-compatible.

Second, I only update the version number when I make a release. I go through the
list of changes in the CHANGELOG and decide whether to update z, y or x. I only
increment one of them and the rest I either leave as-is or reset to 0. To give
some examples of version changes:

-   1.1.1 becomes 1.1.2
-   1.1.1 becomes 1.2.0
-   1.1.1 becomes 2.0.0

Note that I wrote "I only increment one value". With that I mean that if version
1.1.1 would contain 10 different bug fixes, I would still use version number
1.1.2 for the next release and not 1.1.11.


## zest.releaser {#zest-dot-releaser}

One other thing, in the past I used a tool called [zest.releaser](https://zestreleaser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) to automagically
update the version numbers in the code and in the CHANGELOG. It would set the
new version number, commit that change, set the next version number with postfix
`dev` and commit that change too. This is how it played out in practice:

-   Say you start with a version 1.1.1dev.
-   zest.releaser changes the release to version 1.1.1, commit and tag that
    change. This tagged commit is the version to release.
-   zest.releaser changes the release to version 1.1.2dev and commit that change.
    This version is the starting point for new development.

The use of postfix `dev` helps you distinguish development versions from actual
releases. I really liked that idea but I noticed that team members could find it
difficult to work with this versioning scheme. For example, if you have version
1.1.1dev, some would expect the next version to be 1.1.2 and not just 1.1.1.

I found zest.releaser to be really nice but because of the above _and_ because
of the fact that it doesn't support pyproject.toml yet[^fn:1], I haven't used it for
quite some time.

[^fn:1]: The zest.releaser GitHub repo has an open issue to support
    pyproject.toml, [#373 "support PEP621"](https://github.com/zestsoftware/zest.releaser/issues/373).
