+++
title = "Poetry dependency resolution and Python versions"
author = ["Pieter Swinkels"]
date = 2023-01-04
slug = "poetry-dependency-resolution-and-python-versions"
tags = ["python", "poetry"]
draft = false
+++

In a virtualenv using Python 3.9.15, a `poetry install` failed with the
following message:

```nil
Updating dependencies
Resolving dependencies...

The current project's Python requirement (>=3.9,<4.0) is not compatible with some of the required packages Python requirement:
  - numpy requires Python >=3.7,<3.11, so it will not be satisfied for Python >=3.11,<4.0
```

As Python 3.9.1 satisfies both the "current project's Python requirement" and
that of numpy, I wondered why the command failed. Some googling lead me to [this
question](https://python-poetry.org/docs/master/faq/#why-is-poetry-telling-me-that-the-current-projects-python-requirement-is-not-compatible-with-one-or-more-packages-python-requirements) in the poetry FAQ:

> Unlike pip, Poetry doesn’t resolve for just the Python in the current
> environment. Instead it makes sure that a dependency is resolvable within the
> given Python version range in pyproject.toml.

It took me a while to let this sink in but it totally makes sense: you have a
project that states "I work with Python &gt;=3.9,&lt;4.0" even though one of its
dependencies states "I only work with Python &gt;=3.7,&lt;3.11". They cannot both be
right so Poetry does the right things and aborts.

This brings me to another point: the Python requirement "&gt;=3.9,&lt;4.0" makes sense
if Python adheres to semantic versioning. Unfortunately, according to [this
discussion](https://discuss.python.org/t/documenting-python-versioning-and-stability-expectations/11090), it does not:

> Despite similarities, Python does not use the popular semantic versioning\_
> scheme, which was published several decades after Python.

This doesn't mean Python 3.11 isn't compatible to a Python 3.9 for a particular
code base, but there are no guarantees that it is. So you might want to rethink
a Python requirement like "&gt;=3.9,&lt;4.0".
