+++
title = "What makes a design object-oriented?"
author = ["Pieter Swinkels"]
date = 2024-01-03
slug = "what-makes-a-design-object-oriented?"
tags = ["design"]
draft = false
+++

On HackerNews there was [a discussion](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=38781277) about the presentation "[Pitfalls of object
oriented programming](https://harmful.cat-v.org/software/OO_programming/_pdf/Pitfalls_of_Object_Oriented_Programming_GCAP_09.pdf)" (PDF). The HackerNews comments contain [a thread](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=38792682) about 4
characteristics of object-oriented programming (OOP), viz.

-   abstraction,
-   polymorphism,
-   inheritance, and
-   encapsulation.

I first encountered these characteristics in the early 2000s through the
mnemonic "A PIE". I always found it to be a fuzzy "definition" as abstraction,
polymorphism and encapsulation aren't unique to OOP. Another [thread](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=38791122) in the
comments made me wonder what it is that makes a design (or implementation)
"object-oriented"? This note tries to clarify that.

Alan Kay is the one that coined the term "object-oriented", something he
acknowledges in [this email](http://userpage.fu-berlin.de/~ram/pub/pub_jf47ht81Ht/doc_kay_oop_en). In that same email he states

> OOP to me means only messaging, local retention and protection and hiding of
> state-process, and extreme late-binding of all things.

But what does this mean? I googled for "OOP to me means only messaging, local
retention and protection" and found the article [Alan Kay and OO Programming](https://ovid.github.io/articles/alan-kay-and-oo-programming.html) by
Curtis Poe that gives a thoughtful and plausible explanation. Let's go over the
explanations given.

**local retention and protection and hiding of state-process**

Poe makes the case that this doesn't mean encapsulation, or only encapsulation,
but also isolation - "protection" - from anything bad happening inside an
object. The more I think about it, the more it makes sense. Poe states that

> If you think of Web browsers and servers as objects, however, we see something
> closer to his vision. If your browser crashed every time a web server crashed or
> was otherwise unavailable, Microsoft IIS would never have reached 2.0.

That seems to coincide with Kay's opinion. In [this comment](https://computinged.wordpress.com/2010/09/11/moti-asks-objects-never-well-hardly-ever/#comment-3766), Kay states:

> A good example of a large system I consider “object-oriented” is the Internet.
> It has billions of completely encapsulated objects (the computers themselves)
> and uses a pure messaging system of “requests not commands”, etc.

The Internet isn't robust because the nodes cannot access the internals of other
nodes, it's robust because it can handle all kinds of failures in nodes or in
the communication (paths) between nodes. We'll get back to the robustness aspect
when we discuss messaging.

The above still doesn't elaborate on the "local retention" part. I also googled
for that, but I didn't find a satisfactory explanation.

**extreme late binding**

Late binding means that the method to call is determined at runtime and not at
compile time. It's something that is possible in most programming languages, or
at least can be implemented in them. Poe argures that the differentiating aspect
is the "extreme" part: to be able to call methods that only exist at runtime but
not yet at "compile" time. Extreme late binding allows you to build systems that
can change _while they are still running_ (emphasis is from the original
article). There are programming languages / runtime environments where this is
possbile, for example Erlang and Smalltalk. Of course, the Internet wouldn't
work without it.

**messaging**

Poe acknowledges that Kay is rather vague here and even Poe's interpretation of
the term remains rather abstract (at least to me). However, I can connect Poe's
next words to robustness:

> In other words, you don't execute code by calling it by name: you send some data
> (a message) to an object and it figures out which code, if any, to execute in
> response.

It's the object that decides how to handle a message that it receives: it can be
a simple method call, but it can also be an intricate web of messages to other
objects to try multiple approaches. Note that I'm not sure whether the
connection I make here, is correct.

Let's go back to the following quote by Kay:

> OOP to me means only messaging, local retention and protection and hiding of
> state-process, and extreme late-binding of all things.

Ths means that if you use classes or inhertance in your programming language of
choice, your design doesn't automatically become object oriented. Classes and
inheritance are a means to an end, but not the only means. Time to throw away
the pie.

I want to end this note with the following, practical quote from the
[aforementioned comment](https://computinged.wordpress.com/2010/09/11/moti-asks-objects-never-well-hardly-ever/#comment-3766) by Alan Kay:

> If you are “setting” values from the outside of an object, you are doing
> “simulated data structure programming” rather than object oriented programming.
> [...] “Real OOP” is much more about “requests”, and the more the requests invoke
> goals the object knows how to accomplish, the better.
