+++
title = "Accessing offline API documentation from Emacs"
author = ["Pieter Swinkels"]
date = 2023-01-16
slug = "accessing-offline-api-documentation-from-emacs"
tags = ["emacs", "windows"]
draft = false
+++

Prominent Python developer and blogger Hynek Schlawack wrote a [blog post](https://hynek.me/articles/productive-fruit-fly-programmer/) about
the offline API browser [Dash](https://kapeli.com/dash). Dash is a MacOS application that lets you download
the API documentation of multiple software packages and search it offline. You
start it with a press of a button, enter your search terms and it searches the
documentation you downloaded. At the time of writing this, the Dash website
states that it has the documentation of over 200+ software packages, for example
C++, Pandas, Python and Qt.

The blog post mentions there is a package for Emacs that allows you to download
this documentation and search it via Helm, namely [helm-dash](https://github.com/dash-docs-el/helm-dash). I decided to try it
out...


## Nice but... {#nice-but-dot-dot-dot}

At the moment I've only installed the documentation for Python 3. `helm-dash`
allows me to have a browser window at the right location in its official docs
with only a few keystrokes. I've always used Google for that, but hardly ever
does it have the official documentation at the top of its search results. For
now, `helm-dash` is here to stay.

I am a bit concerned about its performance once I start adding more
documentation. Entering the search term in Helm is already sluggish, sometimes
(but not always) the UI locks up for a second. This might find its cause in the
Windows laptop I used to evaluate `helm-dash`[^fn:1].

Unfortunately, before I was able to use `helm-dash`, I encountered a lot of
issues that I had to work around. Most of these issues are Windows-specific and
made me wonder whether I'm its only Windows user ;).


## Issue 1: No function `helm-dash-install-docset` {#issue-1-no-function-helm-dash-install-docset}

After the installation of `helm-dash`, you have to install the documentation for
a specific API (or subject), a so-called docset. To install a docset, you use
function `helm-dash-install-docset`. Unfortunately, that function isn't
available yet as it isn't autoloaded. As a workaround, if you execute
`helm-dash` and immediately abort that function, `helm-dash-install-docset` is
loaded and available.


## Issue 2: Docset installation stops after creation of `~/.docsets` {#issue-2-docset-installation-stops-after-creation-of-dot-docsets}

By default, `helm-dash` installs your docsets in `~/.docsets`. If that directory
doesn't exist, `helm-dash-install-docset` asks you whether it should create that
directory. If you answer "yes", it creates that directory and then stops without
downloading the docset. Fortunately, if you call it again, it does download the
docset.


## Issue 3: Failure to extract docset tarball {#issue-3-failure-to-extract-docset-tarball}

So I executed `helm-dash-install-docset` again and for about a minute, nothing
seems to happen. Then it stops and the `*Messages*` buffer contains the
following lines:

```text
Contacting host: api.github.com:443
Contacting host: raw.github.com:443
Wrote c:/Users/<username>/AppData/Local/Temp/Python_3-feed.xml
Contacting host: sanfrancisco.kapeli.com:80
Wrote c:/Users/<username>/AppData/Local/Temp/Python_3-docset.tgz
helm-M-x-execute-command: Failed to extract c:/Users/<username>/AppData/Local/Temp/Python_3-docset.tgz to c:/Users/<username>/.docsets. Error: 1
```

Browsing through the stack of ELisp functions called, I found the following
function in `dash-docs.el`:

```lisp
(defun dash-docs-extract-and-get-folder (docset-temp-path)
  "Extract DOCSET-TEMP-PATH to DASH-DOCS-DOCSETS-PATH, and return the folder that was newly extracted."
  (with-temp-buffer
    (let* ((call-process-args (list "tar" nil t nil))
	   (process-args (list
			  "xfv" docset-temp-path
			  "-C" (dash-docs-docsets-path)))
	   ;; On Windows, several elements need to be removed from filenames, see
	   ;; https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/desktop/FileIO/naming-a-file#naming-conventions.
	   ;; We replace with underscores on windows. This might lead to broken links.
	   (windows-args (list "--force-local" "--transform" "s/[<>\":?*^|]/_/g"))
	   (result (apply #'call-process
			  (append call-process-args process-args (when (eq system-type 'windows-nt) windows-args)))))
      ;; ...
```

Note the additional options when you want to unpack the docset tarball on
Windows. It turns out that Windows comes with a version of BSD tar pre-installed
and this version doesn't support these options.

```text
(ews-harvester) C:\Users\<username>>which tar
/c/WINDOWS/system32/tar

(ews-harvester) C:\Users\<username>>tar --version
bsdtar 3.5.2 - libarchive 3.5.2 zlib/1.2.5.f-ipp

(ews-harvester) C:\Users\<username>>
```

On my system I also have GNU tar installed (using MSYS2), so I changed the
occurrence of "tar" to use my GNU tar,

```lisp
    (let* ((call-process-args (list "c:/Users/<username>/msys64/usr/bin/tar.exe" nil t nil))
           ;; ...
```

and re-evaluated the function. I executed `helm-dash-install-docset`, again with
the minute-long wait and this time the command was successful:

```text
Contacting host: api.github.com:443
Contacting host: raw.github.com:443
Wrote c:/Users/<username>/AppData/Local/Temp/Python_3-feed.xml
Wrote c:/Users/<username>/AppData/Local/Temp/Python_3-docset.tgz
Docset installed. Add "Python 3" to dash-docs-common-docsets or dash-docs-docsets.
```


## Issue 4: Browser window doesn't open {#issue-4-browser-window-doesn-t-open}

So time to try out `helm-dash`! I entered the string "pathlib" without the
string and after some seconds delay it showed me the options. I pressed return
and... was greeted with the following message:

```text
helm-M-x-execute-command: ShellExecute failed: The system cannot find the file specified.
```

Again I browsed through the stack of ELisp functions and ended at
`browse-url-default-windows-browser` in `browse-url.el`. This function uses
the following construct to open the URL:

```lisp
         (w32-shell-execute "open"
                            ;; w32-shell-execute passes file:// URLs
                            ;; to APIs that expect file names, so we
                            ;; need to unhex any %nn encoded
                            ;; characters in the URL.  We don't do
                            ;; that for other URLs; in particular,
                            ;; default Windows mail client barfs on
                            ;; quotes in the MAILTO URLs, so we prefer
                            ;; to leave the URL with its embedded %nn
                            ;; encoding intact.
                            (if (eq t (compare-strings url nil 7
                                                       "file://" nil nil))
                                (url-unhex-string url)
                              url)))))
```

Some debugging showed me that function `url-unhex-string` changed the URL from

```text
file:///c:/Users/<username>/.docsets/Python%203.docset/Contents/Resources/Documents/doc/library/os.path.html#//apple_ref/Function/os.path.join
```

to

```text
file:///c:/Users/<username>/.docsets/Python 3.docset/Contents/Resources/Documents/doc/library/os.path.html#//apple_ref/Function/os.path.join
```

The replacement of `Python%203` by a space splits the file path in two, hence
the "cannot find the file specified" error message. So I modified a copy of the
function to add spaces around the string

```lisp
                            (if (eq t (compare-strings url nil 7
                                                       "file://" nil nil))
                                (concat "\"" (url-unhex-string url) "\"")
                              url)))))
```

re-evaluated the function and called `helm-dash` again. Yes! This time the
default browser opened the documentation.


## Issue 5: Microsoft Edge ignores specified anchor {#issue-5-microsoft-edge-ignores-specified-anchor}

Everything looked fine and dandy but the browser showed the top of the page: it
didn't scroll the page to the anchor `#//apple_ref/Function/os.path.join`. It
turned out that when you pass a URL to Microsoft Edge, it strips the anchor from
the URL. For example, when I execute the following command in a Windows Command
Prompt:

```bat
explorer "file:///c:/Users/<username>/.docsets/Python 3.docset/Contents/Resources/Documents/doc/library/os.path.html\#//apple_ref/Function/os.path.join"
```

Edge shows me the top of the page. If I use that command with Firefox instead,
Firefox shows me the page at the anchor.

I'm testing this on a locked-down Windows laptop provided by my client. On this
laptop, Microsoft Edge is the default browser and I cannot change it. I didn't
want to spent too much time looking into this issue so I just configured
`browse-url` to use Firefox[^fn:2]. In the end it turned out to be a nice
workaround as it means I have a dedicated window for my offline API
documentation.


## Loose ends {#loose-ends}

If you install a docset, its installation ends with a message like:

```text
Docset installed. Add "Python 3" to dash-docs-common-docsets or dash-docs-docsets.
```

If you don't add it to these variables, these variables are empty after a
restart of Emacs. If you execute `helm-dash` after such a restart, it won't find
anything. You can add it via function `helm-dash-activate-docset` or use
`add-to-list` in your Emacs init fle.

When I use `helm-dash`, the `*dash-docs-error*` buffer opens with messages like
this:

```text
cannot open: "''"

cannot open: "''"

cannot open: "''"

cannot open: "''"
----------------
 HEY! This is dash-docs (sqlite) error logging. If you want to disable it, set `dash-docs-enable-debugging` to nil
----------------
```

I've encountered this message before and no, setting
`dash-docs-enable-debugging` to `nil` doesn't count. If I recall correctly, it
has to do with the way the ELisp code inits the SQLite database. I will look
into this at a later time.

[^fn:1]: The laptop is provided to me by one of my clients. It's locked-down with
    a company proxy and virus scanner, somewhat unstable and definately not a speed
    daemon.
[^fn:2]: To do so, use the Emacs Customize interface to set variable
    `browse-url-browser-function` to Firefox, or set it in code to
    `'browse-url-firerox`.
