+++
title = "Using dash-docs from Spacemacs"
author = ["Pieter Swinkels"]
date = 2023-02-26
slug = "using-dash-docs-from-spacemacs"
tags = ["emacs"]
draft = false
+++

Spacemacs has a [Dash layer](https://github.com/syl20bnr/spacemacs/tree/develop/layers/%2Breaders/dash) but it doesn't seem to add much to the functionality
the [dash-docs](https://github.com/dash-docs-el/helm-dash/blob/a599ec77d296c3725d684ebd241db9b96e3c975f/helm-dash.el#L40) packages provides out of the box. So instead of using that layer,
I'm using these packages directly and this note describes how.


## Installation {#installation}

To install a third-party package like `helm-dash` in Spacemacs, you add it to
variable `dotspacemacs-additional-packages`. `helm-dash` _requires_ `dash-docs`
so when Spacemacs installs `helm-dash`, it will download `dash-docs` from Melpa
_unless it's already installed_. However, I want Spacemacs to use my custom
version of `dash-docs`, so I need to specify that too:

```lisp
   dotspacemacs-additional-packages
   `(
     (dash-docs :location (recipe :fetcher github :repo "swinkels/dash-docs" :branch "avoid-cannot-open-message"))
     helm-dash
     )
```

Unfortunately, even with the snippet above, Spacemacs installs both `helm-dash`
and `dash-docs` from Melpa. The workaround is to manually delete the installed
`dash-docs` package[^fn:1] and to restart Emacs. On restart, Spacemacs will
detect `dash-docs` is missing and install it again, this time from the location
specified in `dotspacemacs-additional-packages`.


## Customization {#customization}

The following snippet lazy loads `helm-dash` and binds the two main functions:

```emacs-lisp
(use-package helm-dash
  ;; don't load the package until you explicitly trigger its load, for example,
  ;; when you call one of the autoloaded functions
  :defer t
  :init
  ;; bind the following helm-dash functions before the package is loaded - note
  ;; that these two functions are autoloaded
  (spacemacs/set-leader-keys-for-major-mode 'python-mode "hd" 'helm-dash-at-point)
  (spacemacs/set-leader-keys-for-major-mode 'python-mode "hD" 'helm-dash))
```

Spacemacs also binds `, h d` to `helm-pydoc` so we lose that binding. I don't
use `helm-pydoc`, so I can live with that.

Finally, use the following hook to automatically activate documentation set
"Python 3" when using Python:

```emacs-lisp
(defun configure-dash-docs-for-python()
  (setq-local dash-docs-common-docsets '("Python 3")))

(add-hook 'python-mode-hook 'configure-dash-docs-for-python)
```

The official dash-docs documentation states you should use set
`dash-docs-docsets`, but that's an error.


## Removal of pylookup {#removal-of-pylookup}

[pylookup](https://github.com/tsgates/pylookup) is an older Emacs package that also allows you to build and query a
local database of HTML documentation. It's part of the Python layer[^fn:2] but as
its functionality is covered by `dash-docs`, I removed it from my Spacemacs
installation:

```emacs-list
   dotspacemacs-excluded-packages '(pylookup)
```

This automatically removes its key binding `, h h`, to `pylookup-lookup`.

[^fn:1]: By default Spacemacs installs packages in
    `$HOME/.emacs/elpa/<emacs-major>.<emacs-minor>/develop`.
[^fn:2]: The upstream version of `pylookup` is not Python3-compatible. A
    Python3-compatible version has been merged into the Spacemacs Python layer as
    [local/pylookup](https://github.com/syl20bnr/spacemacs/tree/develop/layers/+lang/python/local/pylookup).
