+++
title = "Spacemacs and ruff to sort Python imports on save"
author = ["Pieter Swinkels"]
date = 2025-01-08
slug = "spacemacs-and-ruff-to-sort-python-imports-on-save"
tags = ["spacemacs"]
draft = false
+++

Recently I introduced [ruff](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/) in a Python project of a client to format the code
base and to sort the imports. Most of the developers there use PyCharm, which is
easy to configure to use ruff. Surprisingly, it turned out to be more difficult
in Spacemacs. To cut a long story short, Spacemacs[^fn:1] does not support the
use of ruff to sort Python imports _on save_. For this it relies on the LSP
server but the official [ruff LSP server](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/editors/#language-server-protocol) also does not support it.


## Existing support in Spacemacs {#existing-support-in-spacemacs}

In Spacemacs, if you set boolean variable `python-sort-imports-on-save` to `t`,
it will automatically sort the imports of a Python file when you save that file.
This functionality comes with two caveats. First, Spacemacs uses [isort](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/) to sort
the imports, you cannot configure the use of ruff to sort them. Now isort has a
lot of options to tweak its behavior, but I could not configure it to
sufficiently emulate the ruff configuration in-use.

I use the ruff LSP server to format Python code and this brings me to the second
caveat: Spacemacs sorts the imports after the LSP servers have formatted the
code[^fn:2]. According to the [ruff documentation](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/formatter/#sorting-imports) that is the wrong order: you
should first sort the imports and then format the code.

If you want to use ruff to sort the Python imports on save, you either have to
rely on a LSP server that supports this, or write the Emacs Lisp code yourself.
I use 2 Python language servers:

-   [python-lsp-server,](https://github.com/python-lsp/python-lsp-server) or pylsp for short, which I (mostly) use for completions,
    find-references and go-to-definition;
-   [ruff](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/editors/#language-server-protocol) "as a server", which I use for format-on-save and sometimes its code
    actions.

The ruff server does support "(code) format on save", but in ruff, sorting
imports is something else than a code format. This is reflected in the language
server: it can format on save but sorting imports is only available as a code
action. This means you have to manually trigger the code action to sort the
imports. Of course, you can also write some Emacs Lisp to find the appriopriate
code action and execute it on save. I use (the LSP clients) of [lsp-mode](https://emacs-lsp.github.io/lsp-mode/) and this
does not seem to be that straightforward.

Back to python-lsp-server, out-of-the-box it does not support sorting imports on
save. That server has a [ruff plugin](https://github.com/python-lsp/python-lsp-ruff) that _can_ sort the imports on save. Its
"format document" code actually calls ruff twice: first to format the code and
then to sort the imports[^fn:3]. I tried it and it works but there is a snag: in
Emacs the code actions provided by this plugin interfere with the ones provided
by the ruff server. Emacs shows you the same code action twice and it is unclear
which action comes from which server. What's worse is that selecting one
sometimes resulted in a Lisp error. Unfortunately neither the servers nor
lsp-mode seem to give you the option to ignore (certain) code actions.

Finally, python-lsp-server also has an [isort plugin](https://github.com/chantera/python-lsp-isort) plugin that can sort imports
on save. As mentioned before, isort cannot emulate the ruff configuration in
use.


## Workaround time {#workaround-time}

An obvious workaround is to just use isort. Both isort and ruff have a lot of
options to configure their sorting behavior and for the current code I can get
them "close enough". I will need to change a ruff sorting option and this will
modify the current code. This is not a no-go, but it's also not something I can
do immediately.

The workaround I currently use is to call ruff from a Git pre-commit hook. So
Emacs calls ruff to format the file on save and Git updates it when you commmit
the change (and only when necessary). I'm already using pre-commit to configure
the Git hooks and the following config is what you need:

```yaml
repos:
  - repo: https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff-pre-commit
    rev: v0.8.5
    hooks:
      - id: ruff
        args:
          - --select
          - I
          - --fix
        stages:
          - pre-commit
```

In practice this works satisfactory because you know how to keep ruff satisfied
;). It's not ideal though as it can make (and sometimes does make) your commit a
two-step process.

A better option would be to add a `before-save-hook` in Emacs that calls ruff to
sort the imports before the LSP client kicks in. I've googled a bit and this
should be easy to do using the Emacs [reformatter](https://github.com/purcell/emacs-reformatter) package, which lets you easily
define the Lisp commands to run a code formatter. But that's for another day.

[^fn:1]: Spacemacs commit hash abba23b6 installed on December 25, 2024.
[^fn:2]: The function that runs isort is on the global `before-save-hook`. The
    function that triggers the LSP servers to format the code is on the local
    `before-save-hook`. The functions on the local hook run before the ones
    on the global hook.
[^fn:3]: As mentioned earlier, this is the wrong order. You should use ruff to
    first sort the imports and then to format the code.
