+++
title = "Using Emacs profiles side-by-side"
author = ["Pieter Swinkels"]
date = 2024-12-24
slug = "using-emacs-profiles-side-by-side"
tags = ["emacs"]
draft = false
+++

This is very short note about [Chemacs2](https://github.com/plexus/chemacs2), "an Emacs profile switcher, [which]
makes it easy to run multiple Emacs configurations side by side". It's something
I need to do that every now and then, for example when I want to test-drive the
latest [Spacemacs](https://develop.spacemacs.org/) without affecting my main development environment.

Emacs 29 and later support the command-line option `--init-directory=DIR` to
specify where Emacs should for its init files. Sometimes I have to use an older
Emacs version which makes that solution less ideal[^fn:1]. Until now I managed my
Emacs profiles using [stow](https://www.gnu.org/software/stow/), which is a nice tool to manage symlinks. However, its
use case is not "Emacs profile switching" and that makes it somewhat cumbersome
to use.

This note is primarily meant as a quick recap for me. I've noticed that if I
mostly use one profile, I always have to do a Google on how to select or create
another profile. Most of the information here (and more) you can also find in
the Chemacs2 repo README.


## Installation {#installation}

You install Chemacs2 in the `$HOME/.emacs.d` directory, which is a directory
that Emacs can [search for its initialization file](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/emacs/Find-Init.html). That directory is used by
Emacs configurations like Spacemacs and [Doom](https://github.com/doomemacs/doomemacs), so if it already exists, make sure
you create a backup first. Then to install Chemacs2, clone it to
`$HOME/.emacs.d`:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/plexus/chemacs2.git ~/.emacs.d
```


## Configuration and profile selection {#configuration-and-profile-selection}

Chemacs2 uses Emacs lisp file `$HOME/.emacs-profiles` to configure the different
profiles in use. At the time of writing, on my main development machine that
file looked like this:

```emacs-lisp
(("doom" .
  ((user-emacs-directory . "~/repos/swinkels/emacs-doomemacs/emacs-28.2-doomemacs-20240517/.emacs.d")
   (env . (("DOOMDIR" . "~/repos/swinkels/emacs-doomemacs/emacs-28.2-doomemacs-20240517/.doom.d")))))
 ("spacemacs" .
  ((user-emacs-directory . "~/repos/swinkels/emacs-spacemacs/emacs-28.2-spacemacs-20240201/.emacs.d")
   (env . (("SPACEMACSDIR" . "~/repos/swinkels/emacs-spacemacs/emacs-28.2-spacemacs-20240201/.spacemacs.d"))))))
```

Its format is self-explanatory. It defines profiles "doom" and "spacemacs",
their Emacs user directories and their profile directories, the latter through
the use of environment variables.

By default Chemacs2 uses the profile named "default" but you can easily select
another one:

1.  I specify my default profile in `$HOME/.emacs-profile`, a text file that is
    picked up by Chemacs2 and that only contains the name of the profile to use.
    At the time of writing, my default profile is the Spacemacs one so this file
    contains the name `spacemacs`.
2.  When I want to use another profile, I specify its name using command-line
    option `--with-profile`, which is added by Chemacs2. So to specify the use of
    Doom, call Emacs like this: ~emacs --with-profile doom

For completeness, you can also specify the profile to select via environment variable
`CHEMACS_PROFILE`.


## Closing thoughts {#closing-thoughts}

Nothing more to say here, Emacs profile switching using Chemacs2 works like a
charm!

[^fn:1]: I prefer to use the same solution for every one of my Emacs
    installations.
