+++
title = "Let Git for Windows use Pageant as SSH agent"
author = ["Pieter Swinkels"]
date = 2022-11-29
slug = "let-git-for-windows-use-pageant-as-ssh-agent"
draft = false
+++

If you want [Git for Windows](https://gitforwindows.org/) to use Pageant as an SSH agent, you have to set
environment variable `GIT_SSH` to the path of the Plink executable. Here,

-   `GIT_SSH` "is a program that is invoked instead of ssh when Git tries to
    connect to an SSH host"[^fn:1], and
-   Plink is a Windows command-line tool to establish an SSH connection and comes
    with the Putty suite of tools.

So Git for Windows will use Plink to connect to the repo server and Plink will
query a running Pageant instance for the SSH key-pair.

When you use Git to establish an SSH connection to a repo server for the first
time, you're asked to confirm the fingerprint of that server. This works fine
from the command-line but can be a problem when you use Git from another tool.
One example of such a tool is the Git porcelain [lazygit](https://github.com/jesseduffield/lazygit). lazygit doesn't give
you access to Plink and you're stuck.

The easiest way around that is to clone the Git repo from the command-line,
where you will have access to Plink:

```nil
C:\Users\Pieter\repos> git clone git@github.com:swinkels/yadm-dotfiles.git
 The host key is not cached for this server:
  github.com (port 22)
You have no guarantee that the server is the computer you
think it is.
The server's ssh-ed25519 key fingerprint is:
  ssh-ed25519 255 <fingerprint>
If you trust this host, enter "y" to add the key to Plink's
cache and carry on connecting.
If you want to carry on connecting just once, without adding
the key to the cache, enter "n".
If you do not trust this host, press Return to abandon the
connection.
Store key in cache? (y/n, Return cancels connection, i for more info) y
Using username "git".
Access granted. Press Return to begin session.
Server refused to allocate pty

C:\Users\Pieter\repos>
```

Another approach is to use Plink directly, for example via

```nil
plink -agent git@github.org
```

This creates an SSH connection to github.org as user `git` using the SSH key
pair in Pageant.

Finally, Plink stores the fingerprint in the Windows registry for any subsequent
connections, the exact location being
`Computer\HKEY_CURRENT_USER\SOFTWARE\SimonTatham\PuTTY\SshHostKeys`. If you
delete a fingerprint here, you will have to trust its host again.

[^fn:1]: The quote is from section [Git-Internals - Environment Variables](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Internals-Environment-Variables) of the
    [Pro Git book](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2).
